
1. Microsc Res Tech. 2019 Apr 1. doi: 10.1002/jemt.23269. [Epub ahead of print]

Plasmodium species aware based quantification of malaria parasitemia in light
microscopy thin blood smear.

Abbas N(1), Saba T(2), Rehman A(3), Mehmood Z(4), Javaid N(5), Tahir M(6), Khan
NU(1), Ahmed KT(7), Shah R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Islamia College Peshawar, KPK, Pakistan.
(2)College of Computer and Information Sciences, Prince Sultan University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)College of Business Administration, Al Yamamah University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(4)Department of Computer Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology, 
Taxila, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Computer Science, COMSATS University Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Computer Science, COMSATS University Islamabad, Attock Campus,
Pakistan.
(7)Department of Computer Science, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan,
Pakistan.

Malaria is a serious worldwide disease, caused by a bite of a female Anopheles
mosquito. The parasite transferred into complex life round in which it is grown
and reproduces into the human body. The detection and recognition of Plasmodium
species are possible and efficient through a process called staining (Giemsa).
The staining process slightly colorizes the red blood cells (RBCs) but highlights
Plasmodium parasites, white blood cells and artifacts. Giemsa stains nuclei,
chromatin in blue tone and RBCs in pink color. It has been reported in numerous
studies that manual microscopy is not a trustworthy screening technique when
performed by nonexperts. Malaria parasites host in RBCs when it enters the
bloodstream. This paper presents segmentation of Plasmodium parasite from the
thin blood smear points on region growing and dynamic convolution based filtering
algorithm. After segmentation, malaria parasite classified into four Plasmodium
species: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium vivax, and
Plasmodium malaria. The random forest and K-nearest neighbor are used for
classification base on local binary pattern and hue saturation value features.
The sensitivity for malaria parasitemia (MP) is 96.75% on training and testing of
the proposed approach while specificity is 94.59%. Beside these, the comparisons 
of the two features are added to the proposed work for classification having
sensitivity is 83.60% while having specificity is 94.90% through random forest
classifier based on local binary pattern feature.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jemt.23269 
PMID: 30937990 


1. Microsc Res Tech. 2019 Mar;82(3):283-295. doi: 10.1002/jemt.23170. Epub 2018 Dec 
21.

Plasmodium life cycle stage classification based quantification of malaria
parasitaemia in thin blood smears.

Abbas N(1), Saba T(2), Rehman A(3), Mehmood Z(4), Kolivand H(5), Uddin M(6),
Anjum A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Islamia College Peshawar, Pakistan.
(2)College of Computer and Information Sciences, Prince Sultan University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)College of Computer and Information Systems, Al Yamamah University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Software Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology, 
Taxila, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool,
UK.
(6)Information System Department, College of Engineering, Effat University of
Jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Computer Science, COMSATS University Islamabad, Islamabad,
Pakistan.

Visual inspection for the quantification of malaria parasitaemiain (MP) and
classification of life cycle stage are hard and time taking. Even though,
automated techniques for the quantification of MP and their classification are
reported in the literature. However, either reported techniques are imperfect or 
cannot deal with special issues such as anemia and hemoglobinopathies due to
clumps of red blood cells (RBCs). The focus of the current work is to examine the
thin blood smear microscopic images stained with Giemsa by digital image
processing techniques, grading MP on independent factors (RBCs morphology) and
classification of its life cycle stage. For the classification of the life cycle 
of malaria parasite the k-nearest neighbor, Naïve Bayes and multi-class support
vector machine are employed for classification based on histograms of oriented
gradients and local binary pattern features. The proposed methodology is based on
inductive technique, segment malaria parasites through the adaptive machine
learning techniques. The quantification accuracy of RBCs is enhanced; RBCs clumps
are split by analysis of concavity regions for focal points. Further,
classification of infected and non-infected RBCs has been made to grade MP
precisely. The training and testing of the proposed approach on benchmark dataset
with respect to ground truth data, yield 96.75% MP sensitivity and 94.59%
specificity. Additionally, the proposed approach addresses the process with
independent factors (RBCs morphology). Finally, it is an economical solution for 
MP grading in immense testing.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jemt.23170 
PMID: 30575213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 16;11(9):e0163045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163045.
eCollection 2016.

Automated Detection of P. falciparum Using Machine Learning Algorithms with
Quantitative Phase Images of Unstained Cells.

Park HS(1), Rinehart MT(1), Walzer KA(2)(3), Chi JT(2)(3), Wax A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Duke Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, United States of America.

Malaria detection through microscopic examination of stained blood smears is a
diagnostic challenge that heavily relies on the expertise of trained
microscopists. This paper presents an automated analysis method for detection and
staging of red blood cells infected by the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
at trophozoite or schizont stage. Unlike previous efforts in this area, this
study uses quantitative phase images of unstained cells. Erythrocytes are
automatically segmented using thresholds of optical phase and refocused to enable
quantitative comparison of phase images. Refocused images are analyzed to extract
23 morphological descriptors based on the phase information. While all individual
descriptors are highly statistically different between infected and uninfected
cells, each descriptor does not enable separation of populations at a level
satisfactory for clinical utility. To improve the diagnostic capacity, we applied
various machine learning techniques, including linear discriminant classification
(LDC), logistic regression (LR), and k-nearest neighbor classification (NNC), to 
formulate algorithms that combine all of the calculated physical parameters to
distinguish cells more effectively. Results show that LDC provides the highest
accuracy of up to 99.7% in detecting schizont stage infected cells compared to
uninfected RBCs. NNC showed slightly better accuracy (99.5%) than either LDC
(99.0%) or LR (99.1%) for discriminating late trophozoites from uninfected RBCs. 
However, for early trophozoites, LDC produced the best accuracy of 98%.
Discrimination of infection stage was less accurate, producing high specificity
(99.8%) but only 45.0%-66.8% sensitivity with early trophozoites most often
mistaken for late trophozoite or schizont stage and late trophozoite and schizont
stage most often confused for each other. Overall, this methodology points to a
significant clinical potential of using quantitative phase imaging to detect and 
stage malaria infection without staining or expert analysis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163045 
PMCID: PMC5026369
PMID: 27636719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Sep 25;53(10):6582-8.

Automated detection of malarial retinopathy-associated retinal hemorrhages.

Joshi VS(1), Maude RJ, Reinhardt JM, Tang L, Garvin MK, Abu Sayeed A, Ghose A,
Hassan MU, Abràmoff MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

PURPOSE: To develop an automated method for the detection of retinal hemorrhages 
on color fundus images to characterize malarial retinopathy, which may help in
the assessment of patients with cerebral malaria.
METHODS: A fundus image dataset from 14 patients (200 fundus images, with an
average of 14 images per patient) previously diagnosed with malarial retinopathy 
was examined. We developed a pattern recognition-based algorithm, which extracted
features from image watershed regions called splats (tobogganing). A reference
standard was obtained by manual segmentation of hemorrhages, which assigned a
label to each splat. The splat features with the associated splat label were used
to train a linear k-nearest neighbor classifier that learnt the color properties 
of hemorrhages and identified the splats belonging to hemorrhages in a test
dataset. In a crossover design experiment, data from 12 patients were used for
training and data from two patients were used for testing, with 14 different
permutations; and the derived sensitivity and specificity values were averaged.
RESULTS: The experiment resulted in hemorrhage detection sensitivities in terms
of splats as 80.83%, and in terms of lesions as 84.84%. The splat-based
specificity was 96.67%, whereas for the lesion-based analysis, an average of
three false positives was obtained per image. The area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve was reported as 0.9148 for splat-based, and as
0.9030 for lesion-based analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The method provides an automated means of detecting retinal
hemorrhages associated with malarial retinopathy. The results matched well with
the reference standard. With further development, this technique may provide
automated assistance for screening and quantification of malarial retinopathy.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.12-10191 
PMCID: PMC3460387
PMID: 22915035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Amino Acids. 2012 Apr;42(4):1443-54. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-0888-0. Epub 2011
Mar 29.

Mito-GSAAC: mitochondria prediction using genetic ensemble classifier and split
amino acid composition.

Afridi TH(1), Khan A, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Pakistan Institute of
Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nilore, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Mitochondria are all-important organelles of eukaryotic cells since they are
involved in processes associated with cellular mortality and human diseases.
Therefore, trustworthy techniques are highly required for the identification of
new mitochondrial proteins. We propose Mito-GSAAC system for prediction of
mitochondrial proteins. The aim of this work is to investigate an effective
feature extraction strategy and to develop an ensemble approach that can better
exploit the advantages of this feature extraction strategy for mitochondria
classification. We investigate four kinds of protein representations for
prediction of mitochondrial proteins: amino acid composition, dipeptide
composition, pseudo amino acid composition, and split amino acid composition
(SAAC). Individual classifiers such as support vector machine (SVM), k-nearest
neighbor, multilayer perceptron, random forest, AdaBoost, and bagging are first
trained. An ensemble classifier is then built using genetic programming (GP) for 
evolving a complex but effective decision space from the individual decision
spaces of the trained classifiers. The highest prediction performance for
Jackknife test is 92.62% using GP-based ensemble classifier on SAAC features,
which is the highest accuracy, reported so far on the Mitochondria dataset being 
used. While on the Malaria Parasite Mitochondria dataset, the highest accuracy is
obtained by SVM using SAAC and it is further enhanced to 93.21% using GP-based
ensemble. It is observed that SAAC has better discrimination power for
mitochondria prediction over the rest of the feature extraction strategies. Thus,
the improved prediction performance is largely due to the better capability of
SAAC for discriminating between mitochondria and non-mitochondria proteins at the
N and C terminus and the effective combination capability of GP. Mito-GSAAC can
be accessed at http://111.68.99.218/Mito-GSAAC . It is expected that the novel
approach and the accompanied predictor will have a major impact to Molecular Cell
Biology, Proteomics, Bioinformatics, System Biology, and Drug Development.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-011-0888-0 
PMID: 21445589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2011 May 15;27(10):1413-21. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr143.
Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Improving the efficiency of multidimensional scaling in the analysis of
high-dimensional data using singular value decomposition.

Bécavin C(1), Tchitchek N, Mintsa-Eya C, Lesne A, Benecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, Bures sur Yvette, France.

MOTIVATION: Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a well-known multivariate
statistical analysis method used for dimensionality reduction and visualization
of similarities and dissimilarities in multidimensional data. The advantage of
MDS with respect to singular value decomposition (SVD) based methods such as
principal component analysis is its superior fidelity in representing the
distance between different instances specially for high-dimensional geometric
objects. Here, we investigate the importance of the choice of initial conditions 
for MDS, and show that SVD is the best choice to initiate MDS. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the use of the first principal components of SVD to initiate the
MDS algorithm is more efficient than an iteration through all the principal
components. Adding stochasticity to the molecular dynamics simulations typically 
used for MDS of large datasets, contrary to previous suggestions, likewise does
not increase accuracy. Finally, we introduce a k nearest neighbor method to
analyze the local structure of the geometric objects and use it to control the
quality of the dimensionality reduction.
RESULTS: We demonstrate here the, to our knowledge, most efficient and accurate
initialization strategy for MDS algorithms, reducing considerably computational
load. SVD-based initialization renders MDS methodology much more useful in the
analysis of high-dimensional data such as functional genomics datasets.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr143 
PMID: 21421551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Amino Acids. 2010 Mar;38(3):859-67. doi: 10.1007/s00726-009-0292-1. Epub 2009 Apr
22.

Using K-minimum increment of diversity to predict secretory proteins of malaria
parasite based on groupings of amino acids.

Zuo YC(1), Li QZ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Theoretical Biophysics, School of Physical Science and
Technology, Inner Mongolia University, 010021 Hohhot, China.

Due to the complexity of Plasmodium falciparumis genome, predicting secretory
proteins of P. falciparum is more difficult than other species. In this study,
based on the measure of diversity definition, a new K-nearest neighbor method,
K-minimum increment of diversity (K-MID), is introduced to predict secretory
proteins. The prediction performance of the K-MID by using amino acids
composition as the only input vector achieves 88.89% accuracy with 0.78 Mathew's 
correlation coefficient (MCC). Further, the several reduced amino acids alphabets
are applied to predict secretory proteins and the results show that the
prediction results are improved to 90.67% accuracy with 0.83 MCC by using the 169
dipeptide compositions of the reduced amino acids alphabets obtained from Protein
Blocks method.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-009-0292-1 
PMID: 19387791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

