
1. Inform Health Soc Care. 2019 Mar 27:1-13. doi: 10.1080/17538157.2019.1582056.
[Epub ahead of print]

Assessing the relative importance of social determinants of health in malaria and
anemia classiﬁcation based on machine learning techniques.

Sow B(1), Mukhtar H(2), Ahmad HF(3), Suguri H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Graduate School of Project Design , Miyagi University , Sendai City, Miyagi 
Prefecture , Japan.
(2)b Department of Computing, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science , National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST) , Islamabad ,
Pakistan.
(3)c Department of Computer Science, College of Computer Sciences and Information
Technology , King Faisal University , Alahsa , Saudi Arabia.

Disparate types of data including biological and environmental have been used in 
supervised learning to predict a specific disease outcome. However, social
determinants of health, which have been explored very little, promise to be
signiﬁcant predictors of public health problems such as malaria and anemia among 
children. We considered studying their contribution power in malaria and anemia
predictions based on Variable Importance in Projection (VIP). This innovative
method has potential advantages as it analyzes the impact of independent
variables on disease prediction. In addition, we applied ﬁve machine learning
algorithms to classify both diseases, using social determinants of health data,
and compared their results. Of them all, artiﬁcial neural networks gave the best 
results of 94.74% and 84.17% accuracy for malaria and anemia prediction,
respectively. These results are consistent and reﬂect the signiﬁcance of
non-medical factors in disease prediction.

DOI: 10.1080/17538157.2019.1582056 
PMID: 30917718 


1. Malar J. 2018 Sep 25;17(1):339. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2493-0.

Automated microscopy for routine malaria diagnosis: a field comparison on
Giemsa-stained blood films in Peru.

Torres K(1), Bachman CM(2), Delahunt CB(3), Alarcon Baldeon J(1), Alava F(1),
Gamboa Vilela D(1), Proux S(4), Mehanian C(3), McGuire SK(3), Thompson CM(3),
Ostbye T(3), Hu L(3), Jaiswal MS(3), Hunt VM(3), Bell D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Laboratorio de Malaria, Laboratiorios de
Investigacion y Dessarrollo, Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofia, Av. Honorio
Delgado 430 SMP, Lima, Peru.
(2)Intellectual Ventures, 3150 139 AVE SE, Bellevue, WA, 98005, USA.
christineb@intven.com.
(3)Intellectual Ventures, 3150 139 AVE SE, Bellevue, WA, 98005, USA.
(4)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained blood films remains a major
form of diagnosis in malaria case management, and is a reference standard for
research. However, as with other visualization-based diagnoses, accuracy depends 
on individual technician performance, making standardization difficult and
reliability poor. Automated image recognition based on machine-learning,
utilizing convolutional neural networks, offers potential to overcome these
drawbacks. A prototype digital microscope device employing an algorithm based on 
machine-learning, the Autoscope, was assessed for its potential in malaria
microscopy. Autoscope was tested in the Iquitos region of Peru in 2016 at two
peripheral health facilities, with routine microscopy and PCR as reference
standards. The main outcome measures include sensitivity and specificity of
diagnosis of malaria from Giemsa-stained blood films, using PCR as reference.
METHODS: A cross-sectional, observational trial was conducted at two peripheral
primary health facilities in Peru. 700 participants were enrolled with the
criteria: (1) age between 5 and 75 years, (2) history of fever in the last 3 days
or elevated temperature on admission, (3) informed consent. The main outcome
measures included sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis of malaria from
Giemsa-stained blood films, using PCR as reference.
RESULTS: At the San Juan clinic, sensitivity of Autoscope for diagnosing malaria 
was 72% (95% CI 64-80%), and specificity was 85% (95% CI 79-90%). Microscopy
performance was similar to Autoscope, with sensitivity 68% (95% CI 59-76%) and
specificity 100% (95% CI 98-100%). At San Juan, 85% of prepared slides had a
minimum of 600 WBCs imaged, thus meeting Autoscope's design assumptions. At the
second clinic, Santa Clara, the sensitivity of Autoscope was 52% (95% CI 44-60%) 
and specificity was 70% (95% CI 64-76%). Microscopy performance at Santa Clara
was 42% (95% CI 34-51) and specificity was 97% (95% CI 94-99). Only 39% of slides
from Santa Clara met Autoscope's design assumptions regarding WBCs imaged.
CONCLUSIONS: Autoscope's diagnostic performance was on par with routine
microscopy when slides had adequate blood volume to meet its design assumptions, 
as represented by results from the San Juan clinic. Autoscope's diagnostic
performance was poorer than routine microscopy on slides from the Santa Clara
clinic, which generated slides with lower blood volumes. Results of the study
reflect both the potential for artificial intelligence to perform tasks currently
conducted by highly-trained experts, and the challenges of replicating the
adaptiveness of human thought processes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2493-0 
PMCID: PMC6157053
PMID: 30253764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Med Imaging (Bellingham). 2018 Jul;5(3):034501. doi: 10.1117/1.JMI.5.3.034501. 
Epub 2018 Jul 18.

Understanding the learned behavior of customized convolutional neural networks
toward malaria parasite detection in thin blood smear images.

Rajaraman S(1), Silamut K(2), Hossain MA(3), Ersoy I(4), Maude RJ(2)(5), Jaeger
S(1), Thoma GR(1), Antani SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library of
Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(2)Mahidol University, Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Chittagong Medical Hospital, Department of Medicine, Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(4)University of Missouri, MU Informatics Institute, Department of Pathology and 
Anatomical Science, Columbia, Missouri, United States.
(5)University of Oxford, Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield
Department of Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the architecture of choice for
visual recognition tasks. However, these models are perceived as black boxes
since there is a lack of understanding of the learned behavior from the
underlying task of interest. This lack of transparency is a serious drawback,
particularly in applications involving medical screening and diagnosis since
poorly understood model behavior could adversely impact subsequent clinical
decision-making. Recently, researchers have begun working on this issue and
several methods have been proposed to visualize and understand the behavior of
these models. We highlight the advantages offered through visualizing and
understanding the weights, saliencies, class activation maps, and region of
interest localizations in customized CNNs applied to the challenge of classifying
parasitized and uninfected cells to aid in malaria screening. We provide an
explanation for the models' classification decisions. We characterize, evaluate, 
and statistically validate the performance of different customized CNNs keeping
every training subject's data separate from the validation set.

DOI: 10.1117/1.JMI.5.3.034501 
PMCID: PMC6050500 [Available on 2019-07-18]
PMID: 30035153 


1. J Med Syst. 2018 May 2;42(6):110. doi: 10.1007/s10916-018-0962-1.

Development of a Robust Algorithm for Detection of Nuclei and Classification of
White Blood Cells in Peripheral Blood Smear Images.

Hegde RB(1), Prasad K(2), Hebbar H(1), Singh BMK(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Information Sciences, MAHE, Manipal, 576104, India.
(2)School of Information Sciences, MAHE, Manipal, 576104, India.
keerthana.prasad@manipal.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kasturba Medical College, MAHE, Manipal, Karnataka,
574106, India.

Peripheral Blood Smear analysis plays a vital role in diagnosis of many diseases 
such as leukemia, anemia, malaria, lymphoma and infections. Unusual variations in
color, shape and size of blood cells indicate abnormal condition. We used a total
of 117 images from Leishman stained peripheral blood smears acquired at a
magnification of 100X. In this paper we present a robust image processing
algorithm for detection of nuclei and classification of white blood cells based
on features of the nuclei. We used novel image enhancement method to manage
illumination variations and TissueQuant method to manage color variations for the
detection of nuclei. Dice similarity coefficient of 0.95 was obtained for nucleus
detection. We also compared the proposed method with a state-of-the-art method
and the proposed method was found to be better. Shape and texture features of the
detected nuclei were used for classifying white blood cells. We considered
classification of WBCs using two approaches such as 5-class and cell-by-cell
approaches using neural network and hybrid-classifier respectively. We compared
the results of both the approaches for classification of white blood cells.
Cell-by-cell approach offered 1.4% higher sensitivity in comparison with the
5-class approach. We obtained an accuracy of 100% for lymphocyte and basophil
detection. Hence, we conclude that lymphocytes and basophils can be accurately
detected even when the analysis is limited to the features of nuclei whereas,
accurate detection of other types of WBCs will require analysis of the cytoplasm 
too.

DOI: 10.1007/s10916-018-0962-1 
PMID: 29721616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PeerJ. 2018 Apr 16;6:e4568. doi: 10.7717/peerj.4568. eCollection 2018.

Pre-trained convolutional neural networks as feature extractors toward improved
malaria parasite detection in thin blood smear images.

Rajaraman S(1), Antani SK(1), Poostchi M(1), Silamut K(2), Hossain MA(3), Maude
RJ(2)(4)(5), Jaeger S(1), Thoma GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library of
Medicine, Bethesda, MD, United States of America.
(2)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Department of Medicine, Chittagong Medical Hospital, Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, MA,
United States of America.

Malaria is a blood disease caused by the Plasmodium parasites transmitted through
the bite of female Anopheles mosquito. Microscopists commonly examine thick and
thin blood smears to diagnose disease and compute parasitemia. However, their
accuracy depends on smear quality and expertise in classifying and counting
parasitized and uninfected cells. Such an examination could be arduous for
large-scale diagnoses resulting in poor quality. State-of-the-art image-analysis 
based computer-aided diagnosis (CADx) methods using machine learning (ML)
techniques, applied to microscopic images of the smears using hand-engineered
features demand expertise in analyzing morphological, textural, and positional
variations of the region of interest (ROI). In contrast, Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN), a class of deep learning (DL) models promise highly scalable and 
superior results with end-to-end feature extraction and classification. Automated
malaria screening using DL techniques could, therefore, serve as an effective
diagnostic aid. In this study, we evaluate the performance of pre-trained CNN
based DL models as feature extractors toward classifying parasitized and
uninfected cells to aid in improved disease screening. We experimentally
determine the optimal model layers for feature extraction from the underlying
data. Statistical validation of the results demonstrates the use of pre-trained
CNNs as a promising tool for feature extraction for this purpose.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.4568 
PMCID: PMC5907772
PMID: 29682411 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.


1. ACS Cent Sci. 2018 Jan 24;4(1):120-131. doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00512. Epub
2017 Dec 28.

Generating Focused Molecule Libraries for Drug Discovery with Recurrent Neural
Networks.

Segler MHS(1), Kogej T(2), Tyrchan C(3), Waller MP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry & Center for Multiscale Theory and Computation,
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(2)Hit Discovery, Discovery Sciences, AstraZeneca R&D, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, IMED RIA, AstraZeneca R&D, Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(4)Department of Physics & International Centre for Quantum and Molecular
Structures, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China.

In de novo drug design, computational strategies are used to generate novel
molecules with good affinity to the desired biological target. In this work, we
show that recurrent neural networks can be trained as generative models for
molecular structures, similar to statistical language models in natural language 
processing. We demonstrate that the properties of the generated molecules
correlate very well with the properties of the molecules used to train the model.
In order to enrich libraries with molecules active toward a given biological
target, we propose to fine-tune the model with small sets of molecules, which are
known to be active against that target. Against Staphylococcus aureus, the model 
reproduced 14% of 6051 hold-out test molecules that medicinal chemists designed, 
whereas against Plasmodium falciparum (Malaria), it reproduced 28% of 1240 test
molecules. When coupled with a scoring function, our model can perform the
complete de novo drug design cycle to generate large sets of novel molecules for 
drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00512 
PMCID: PMC5785775
PMID: 29392184 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.


1. Artif Intell Med. 2018 Jan;84:127-138. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.12.002. Epub
2017 Dec 11.

Spatiotemporal Bayesian networks for malaria prediction.

Haddawy P(1), Hasan AHMI(2), Kasantikul R(2), Lawpoolsri S(3), Sa-Angchai P(3),
Kaewkungwal J(3), Singhasivanon P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of ICT, Mahidol University, 999 Phuttamonthon 4 Rd, Salaya,
Nakhonpathom 73170 Thailand. Electronic address: peter.had@mahidol.ac.th.
(2)Faculty of ICT, Mahidol University, 999 Phuttamonthon 4 Rd, Salaya,
Nakhonpathom 73170 Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, 420/6 Ratchawithi Rd,
Bangkok 10400 Thailand.

Targeted intervention and resource allocation are essential for effective malaria
control, particularly in remote areas, with predictive models providing important
information for decision making. While a diversity of modeling technique have
been used to create predictive models of malaria, no work has made use of
Bayesian networks. Bayes nets are attractive due to their ability to represent
uncertainty, model time lagged and nonlinear relations, and provide explanations.
This paper explores the use of Bayesian networks to model malaria, demonstrating 
the approach by creating village level models with weekly temporal resolution for
Tha Song Yang district in northern Thailand. The networks are learned using data 
on cases and environmental covariates. Three types of networks are explored:
networks for numeric prediction, networks for outbreak prediction, and networks
that incorporate spatial autocorrelation. Evaluation of the numeric prediction
network shows that the Bayes net has prediction accuracy in terms of mean
absolute error of about 1.4 cases for 1 week prediction and 1.7 cases for 6 week 
prediction. The network for outbreak prediction has an ROC AUC above 0.9 for all 
prediction horizons. Comparison of prediction accuracy of both Bayes nets against
several traditional modeling approaches shows the Bayes nets to outperform the
other models for longer time horizon prediction of high incidence transmission.
To model spread of malaria over space, we elaborate the models with links between
the village networks. This results in some very large models which would be far
too laborious to build by hand. So we represent the models as collections of
probability logic rules and automatically generate the networks. Evaluation of
the models shows that the autocorrelation links significantly improve prediction 
accuracy for some villages in regions of high incidence. We conclude that
spatiotemporal Bayesian networks are a highly promising modeling alternative for 
prediction of malaria and other vector-borne diseases.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.12.002 
PMID: 29241658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Pharm. 2017 Dec 4;14(12):4462-4475. doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00578.
Epub 2017 Nov 13.

Comparison of Deep Learning With Multiple Machine Learning Methods and Metrics
Using Diverse Drug Discovery Data Sets.

Korotcov A(1), Tkachenko V(1), Russo DP(2)(3), Ekins S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Science Data Software, LLC , 14914 Bradwill Court, Rockville, Maryland 20850, 
United States.
(2)Collaborations Pharmaceuticals, Inc. , 840 Main Campus Drive, Lab 3510,
Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, United States.
(3)The Rutgers Center for Computational and Integrative Biology , Camden, New
Jersey 08102, United States.

Machine learning methods have been applied to many data sets in pharmaceutical
research for several decades. The relative ease and availability of fingerprint
type molecular descriptors paired with Bayesian methods resulted in the
widespread use of this approach for a diverse array of end points relevant to
drug discovery. Deep learning is the latest machine learning algorithm attracting
attention for many of pharmaceutical applications from docking to virtual
screening. Deep learning is based on an artificial neural network with multiple
hidden layers and has found considerable traction for many artificial
intelligence applications. We have previously suggested the need for a comparison
of different machine learning methods with deep learning across an array of
varying data sets that is applicable to pharmaceutical research. End points
relevant to pharmaceutical research include absorption, distribution, metabolism,
excretion, and toxicity (ADME/Tox) properties, as well as activity against
pathogens and drug discovery data sets. In this study, we have used data sets for
solubility, probe-likeness, hERG, KCNQ1, bubonic plague, Chagas, tuberculosis,
and malaria to compare different machine learning methods using FCFP6
fingerprints. These data sets represent whole cell screens, individual proteins, 
physicochemical properties as well as a data set with a complex end point. Our
aim was to assess whether deep learning offered any improvement in testing when
assessed using an array of metrics including AUC, F1 score, Cohen's kappa,
Matthews correlation coefficient and others. Based on ranked normalized scores
for the metrics or data sets Deep Neural Networks (DNN) ranked higher than SVM,
which in turn was ranked higher than all the other machine learning methods.
Visualizing these properties for training and test sets using radar type plots
indicates when models are inferior or perhaps over trained. These results also
suggest the need for assessing deep learning further using multiple metrics with 
much larger scale comparisons, prospective testing as well as assessment of
different fingerprints and DNN architectures beyond those used.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00578 
PMCID: PMC5741413
PMID: 29096442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Neural Netw. 2018 Jan;97:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2017.09.002. Epub 2017 Sep
21.

Quantum associative memory with linear and non-linear algorithms for the
diagnosis of some tropical diseases.

Tchapet Njafa JP(1), Nana Engo SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Photonics, Department of Physics, University of Ngaoundere, PO. 
BOX 454 Ngaoundere, Cameroon. Electronic address: jptchapet@univ-ndere.cm.
(2)Laboratory of Photonics, Department of Physics, University of Ngaoundere, PO. 
BOX 454 Ngaoundere, Cameroon.

This paper presents the QAMDiagnos, a model of Quantum Associative Memory (QAM)
that can be a helpful tool for medical staff without experience or laboratory
facilities, for the diagnosis of four tropical diseases (malaria, typhoid fever, 
yellow fever and dengue) which have several similar signs and symptoms. The
memory can distinguish a single infection from a polyinfection. Our model is a
combination of the improved versions of the original linear quantum retrieving
algorithm proposed by Ventura and the non-linear quantum search algorithm of
Abrams and Lloyd. From the given simulation results, it appears that the
efficiency of recognition is good when particular signs and symptoms of a disease
are inserted given that the linear algorithm is the main algorithm. The
non-linear algorithm helps confirm or correct the diagnosis or give some advice
to the medical staff for the treatment. So, our QAMDiagnos that has a friendly
graphical user interface for desktop and smart-phone is a sensitive and a
low-cost diagnostic tool that enables rapid and accurate diagnosis of four
tropical diseases.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2017.09.002 
PMID: 29031082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Curr Comput Aided Drug Des. 2016;12(1):52-61.

Artificial Neural Network Analysis of Pharmacokinetic and Toxicity Properties of 
Lead Molecules for Dengue Fever, Tuberculosis and Malaria.

Nilar SH, Lakshminarayana SB(1), Ma NL, Keller TH, Blasco F, Smith PW.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases, 10 Biopolis Road, #05-01 Chromos,
138670, Singapore. suresh.b_lakshminarayana@novartis.com.

Poor pharmacokinetic and toxicity profiles are major reasons for the low rate of 
advancing lead drug candidates into efficacy studies. The In-silico prediction of
primary pharmacokinetic and toxicity properties in the drug discovery and
development process can be used as guidance in the design of candidates.
In-silico parameters can also be used to choose suitable compounds for in-vivo
testing thereby reducing the number of animals used in experiments. At the
Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases, a data set has been curated from
in-house measurements in the disease areas of Dengue, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
Volume of distribution, half-life, total in-vivo clearance, in-vitro human plasma
protein binding and in-vivo oral bioavailability have been measured for molecules
in the lead optimization stage in each of these three disease areas. Data for the
inhibition of the hERG channel using the radio ligand binding dofetilide assay
was determined for a set of 300 molecules in these therapeutic areas. Based on
this data, Artificial Neural Networks were used to construct In-silico models for
each of the properties listed above that can be used to prioritize candidates for
lead optimization and to assist in selecting promising molecules for in-vivo
pharmacokinetic studies.


PMID: 26777113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2015;18(8):819-29.

Artificial Neural Network Methods Applied to Drug Discovery for Neglected
Diseases.

Scotti L(1), Ishiki H, Mendonça Júnior FJ, da Silva MS, Scotti MT.

Author information: 
(1)Health Sciences Center, Federal University of Paraiba, Campus I, 58051-970,
João Pessoa, PB, Brazil. luciana.scotti@gmail.com.

Among the chemometric tools used in rational drug design, we find artificial
neural network methods (ANNs), a statistical learning algorithm similar to the
human brain, to be quite powerful. Some ANN applications use biological and
molecular data of the training series that are inserted to ensure the machine
learning, and to generate robust and predictive models. In drug discovery,
researchers use this methodology, looking to find new chemotherapeutic agents for
various diseases. The neglected diseases are a group of tropical parasitic
diseases that primarily affect poor countries in Africa, Asia, and South America.
Current drugs against these diseases cause side effects, are ineffective during
the chronic stages of the disease, and are often not available to the needy
population, have relative high toxicity, and face developing resistance. Faced
with so many problems, new chemotherapeutic agents to treat these infections are 
much needed. The present review reports on neural network research, which studies
new ligands against Chagas' disease, sleeping sickness, malaria, tuberculosis,
and leishmaniasis; a few of the neglected diseases.


PMID: 26234510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Clin Microbiol. 2015 Jan;53(1):167-71. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01783-14. Epub 2014 Nov
5.

Detection of intracellular parasites by use of the CellaVision DM96 analyzer
during routine screening of peripheral blood smears.

Racsa LD(1), Gander RM(2), Southern PM(2), McElvania TeKippe E(1), Doern C(1),
Luu HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA
Parkland Health and Hospital System, Dallas, Texas, USA University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Parkland Health and Hospital System, Dallas, Texas, USA University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Children's Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA
Parkland Health and Hospital System, Dallas, Texas, USA University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Hung.Luu@childrens.com.

Conventional microscopy is the gold standard for malaria diagnosis. The
CellaVision DM96 is a digital hematology analyzer that utilizes neural networks
to locate, digitize, and preclassify leukocytes and characterize red blood cell
morphology. This study compared the detection rates of Plasmodium and Babesia
species on peripheral blood smears utilizing the CellaVision DM96 with the rates 
for a routine red blood cell morphology scan. A total of 281 slides were
analyzed, consisting of 130 slides positive for Plasmodium or Babesia species and
151 negative controls. Slides were blinded, randomized, and analyzed by
CellaVision and microscopy for red cell morphology scans. The technologists were 
blinded to prior identification results. The parasite detection rate was 73%
(95/130) for CellaVision and 81% (105/130) for microscopy for positive samples.
The interobserver agreement between CellaVision and microscopy was fair, as
Cohen's kappa coefficient equaled 0.36. Pathologist review of CellaVision images 
identified an additional 15 slides with parasites, bringing the total number of
detectable positive slides to 110 of 130 (85%). Plasmodium ovale had the lowest
rate of detection at 56% (5 of 9); Plasmodium malariae and Babesia spp. had the
highest rate of detection at 100% (3/3 and 6/6, respectively). The detection rate
by CellaVision was 100% (23/23) when the parasitemia was ≥2.5%. The detection
rate for <0.1% parasitemia was 63% (15/24). Technologists appropriately
classified all negative specimens. The percentage of positive specimens
detectable by CellaVision (73%) approaches results for microscopy on routine scan
of peripheral blood smears for red blood cell morphology.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01783-14 
PMCID: PMC4290916
PMID: 25378575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Comput Biol Med. 2013 Nov;43(11):1724-31. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2013.08.020. 
Epub 2013 Sep 3.

A two-layered classifier based on the radial basis function for the screening of 
thalassaemia.

Masala GL(1), Golosio B, Cutzu R, Pola R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Sassari, via Piandanna 4, 07100, Sassari, Italy. Electronic
address: gilmasala@uniss.it.

The thalassaemias are blood disorders with hereditary transmission. Their
distribution is global, with particular incidence in areas affected by malaria.
Their diagnosis is mainly based on haematologic and genetic analyses. The aim of 
this study was to differentiate between persons with the thalassaemia trait and
normal subjects by inspecting characteristics of haemochromocytometric data. The 
paper proposes an original method that is useful in screening activity for
thalassaemia classification. A complete working system with a friendly graphical 
user interface is presented. A unique feature of the presented work is the
adoption of a two-layered classification system based on Radial basis function,
which improves the performance of the system.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2013.08.020 
PMID: 24209918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2013;2013:5390-3. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610767.

Application of artificial neural networks on mosquito Olfactory Receptor Neurons 
for an olfactory biosensor.

Bachtiar LR, Unsworth CP, Newcomb RD.

Various odorants such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and 1-octen-3-ol, underlie the
host-seeking behaviors of the major malaria vector Anopheles Gambiae. Highlighted
by the olfactory processing strength of the mosquito, such a powerful olfactory
sense could serve as the sensors of an artificial olfactory biosensor. In this
work, we use the firing rates of the A. Gambiae mosquito Olfactory Receptor
Neurons (ORNs), to train an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) for the
classification of volatile odorants into their known chemical classes and assess 
their suitability for an olfactory biosensor. With the implementation of
bootstrapping, a more representative result was obtained wherein we demonstrate
the training of a hybrid ANN consisting of an array of Multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLPs) with optimal number of hidden neurons. The ANN system was able to
correctly class 90.1% of the previously unseen odorants, thus demonstrating very 
strong evidence for the use of A. Gambiae olfactory receptors coupled with an ANN
as an olfactory biosensor.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610767 
PMID: 24110954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Curr Comput Aided Drug Des. 2013 Mar;9(1):95-107.

QSAR modeling for the antimalarial activity of 1,4-naphthoquinonyl derivatives as
potential antimalarial agents.

Luan F(1), Xu X, Cordeiro MN, Liu H, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Yantai University, Yantai, P. R. China.
fluan@sina.com

Malaria has been known as one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality on a
large scale in tropical countries until now. In the past decades, many scientific
groups have focused their attention on looking for ideal drugs to this disease.
So far, this research area is still a hot topic. In the present study, the
antimalarial activity of 1, 4- naphthoquinonyl derivatives was modeled by linear 
and nonlinear statistical methods, that is to say, by forward stepwise
multilinear regression (MLR) and radial basis function neural networks (RBFNN).
The derived QSAR models have been statistically validated both internally - by
means of the Leave One Out (LOO) and Leave Many Out (LMO) crossvalidation, and
Y-scrambling techniques, as well as externally (by means of an external test
set). The statistical parameters provided by the MLR model were R(2) =0.7876,
LOOq(2) =0.7068, RMS =0.3377, R0 2 =0.7876, k =1.0000 for the training set,and
R(2) =0.7648, q(2) ext =0.7597, RMS=0.2556, R0 2=0.7598, k=1.0417 for the
external test set. The RBFNN model gave the following statistical results,
namely: R(2)=0.8338, LOOq(2)=0.5869, RMS=0.2781, R0 2 = 0.8335, k=1.0000 for the 
training set, and R(2) =0.7586, q(2) ext =0.7189, RMS=0.2788, R0 2=0.7129,
k=1.0284 for the external test set. Overall, these results suggest that the QSAR 
MLR-based model is a simple, reliable, credible and fast tool for the prediction 
and virtual screening of 1, 4-naphoquinone derivatives with high antimalarial
activity. In addition, the energies of the highest occupied molecular orbital
were found to have high correlation with the activity.


PMID: 23157413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2010 Sep-Oct;43(5):567-70.

[Use of an artificial neural network to predict the incidence of malaria in the
city of Cantá, state of Roraima].

[Article in Portuguese]

Cunha GB(1), Luitgards-Moura JF, Naves EL, Andrade AO, Pereira AA, Milagre ST.

Author information: 
(1)Curso de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de Roraima, Boa Vista,
RR. guilherme.ufrr@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Malaria is endemic in the Brazilian Amazon region, with different
risks for each region. The City of Cantá, State of Roraima, presented one of the 
largest annual parasite indices in Brazil for the entire study period, with a
value always greater than 50. The present study aimed to use an artificial neural
network to predict the incidence of malaria in this city in order to assist
health coordinators in planning and managing resources.
METHODS: Data were collected on the website of the Ministry of Health,
SIVEP--Malaria between 2003 and 2009. An artificial neural network was structured
with three neurons in the input layer, two intermediate layers and an output
layer with one neuron. A sigmoid activation function was used. In training, the
backpropagation method was used, with a learning rate of 0.05 and momentum of
0.01. The stopping criterion was to reach 20,000 cycles or a target of 0.001. The
data from 2003 to 2008 were used for training and validation. The results were
compared with those from a logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The results for all periods provided showed that the artificial neural
network had a smaller mean square error and absolute error compared with the
regression model for the year 2009.
CONCLUSIONS: The artificial neural network proved to be adequate for a malaria
forecasting system in the city studied, determining smaller predictive values
with absolute errors compared to the logistic regression model and the actual
values.


PMID: 21085871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Malar J. 2010 Aug 19;9:236. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-236.

Chaperone expression profiles correlate with distinct physiological states of
Plasmodium falciparum in malaria patients.

Pallavi R(1), Acharya P, Chandran S, Daily JP, Tatu U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012
Karnataka, India.

BACKGROUND: Molecular chaperones have been shown to be important in the growth of
the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and inhibition of chaperone function
by pharmacological agents has been shown to abrogate parasite growth. A recent
study has demonstrated that clinical isolates of the parasite have distinct
physiological states, one of which resembles environmental stress response
showing up-regulation of specific molecular chaperones.
METHODS: Chaperone networks operational in the distinct physiological clusters in
clinical malaria parasites were constructed using cytoscape by utilizing their
clinical expression profiles.
RESULTS: Molecular chaperones show distinct profiles in the previously defined
physiologically distinct states. Further, expression profiles of the chaperones
from different cellular compartments correlate with specific patient clusters.
While cluster 1 parasites, representing a starvation response, show up-regulation
of organellar chaperones, cluster 2 parasites, which resemble active growth based
on glycolysis, show up-regulation of cytoplasmic chaperones. Interestingly,
cytoplasmic Hsp90 and its co-chaperones, previously implicated as drug targets in
malaria, cluster in the same group. Detailed analysis of chaperone expression in 
the patient cluster 2 reveals up-regulation of the entire Hsp90-dependent
pro-survival circuitries. In addition, cluster 2 also shows up-regulation of
Plasmodium export element (PEXEL)-containing Hsp40s thought to have regulatory
and host remodeling roles in the infected erythrocyte.
CONCLUSION: In all, this study demonstrates an intimate involvement of
parasite-encoded chaperones, PfHsp90 in particular, in defining pathogenesis of
malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-236 
PMCID: PMC2933700
PMID: 20719001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Malar J. 2010 May 13;9:125. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-125.

Towards malaria risk prediction in Afghanistan using remote sensing.

Adimi F(1), Soebiyanto RP, Safi N, Kiang R.

Author information: 
(1)Global Change Data Center, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt,
Maryland 20771, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is a significant public health concern in Afghanistan.
Currently, approximately 60% of the population, or nearly 14 million people, live
in a malaria-endemic area. Afghanistan's diverse landscape and terrain
contributes to the heterogeneous malaria prevalence across the country.
Understanding the role of environmental variables on malaria transmission can
further the effort for malaria control programme.
METHODS: Provincial malaria epidemiological data (2004-2007) collected by the
health posts in 23 provinces were used in conjunction with space-borne
observations from NASA satellites. Specifically, the environmental variables,
including precipitation, temperature and vegetation index measured by the
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission and the Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectoradiometer, were used. Regression techniques were employed to model malaria
cases as a function of environmental predictors. The resulting model was used for
predicting malaria risks in Afghanistan. The entire time series except the last 6
months is used for training, and the last 6-month data is used for prediction and
validation.
RESULTS: Vegetation index, in general, is the strongest predictor, reflecting the
fact that irrigation is the main factor that promotes malaria transmission in
Afghanistan. Surface temperature is the second strongest predictor. Precipitation
is not shown as a significant predictor, as it may not directly lead to higher
larval population. Autoregressiveness of the malaria epidemiological data is
apparent from the analysis. The malaria time series are modelled well, with
provincial average R2 of 0.845. Although the R2 for prediction has larger
variation, the total 6-month cases prediction is only 8.9% higher than the actual
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The provincial monthly malaria cases can be modelled and predicted
using satellite-measured environmental parameters with reasonable accuracy. The
Third Strategic Approach of the WHO EMRO Malaria Control and Elimination Plan is 
aimed to develop a cost-effective surveillance system that includes forecasting, 
early warning and detection. The predictive and early warning capabilities shown 
in this paper support this strategy.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-125 
PMCID: PMC2878304
PMID: 20465824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Malar J. 2010 May 6;9:117. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-117.

Towards a precise test for malaria diagnosis in the Brazilian Amazon: comparison 
among field microscopy, a rapid diagnostic test, nested PCR, and a computational 
expert system based on artificial neural networks.

Andrade BB(1), Reis-Filho A, Barros AM, Souza-Neto SM, Nogueira LL, Fukutani KF, 
Camargo EP, Camargo LM, Barral A, Duarte A, Barral-Netto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, OCRUZ, Bahia, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Accurate malaria diagnosis is mandatory for the treatment and
management of severe cases. Moreover, individuals with asymptomatic malaria are
not usually screened by health care facilities, which further complicates disease
control efforts. The present study compared the performances of a malaria rapid
diagnosis test (RDT), the thick blood smear method and nested PCR for the
diagnosis of symptomatic malaria in the Brazilian Amazon. In addition, an
innovative computational approach was tested for the diagnosis of asymptomatic
malaria.
METHODS: The study was divided in two parts. For the first part, passive case
detection was performed in 311 individuals with malaria-related symptoms from a
recently urbanized community in the Brazilian Amazon. A cross-sectional
investigation compared the diagnostic performance of the RDT Optimal-IT, nested
PCR and light microscopy. The second part of the study involved active case
detection of asymptomatic malaria in 380 individuals from riverine communities in
Rondônia, Brazil. The performances of microscopy, nested PCR and an expert
computational system based on artificial neural networks (MalDANN) using
epidemiological data were compared.
RESULTS: Nested PCR was shown to be the gold standard for diagnosis of both
symptomatic and asymptomatic malaria because it detected the major number of
cases and presented the maximum specificity. Surprisingly, the RDT was superior
to microscopy in the diagnosis of cases with low parasitaemia. Nevertheless, RDT 
could not discriminate the Plasmodium species in 12 cases of mixed infections
(Plasmodium vivax + Plasmodium falciparum). Moreover, the microscopy presented
low performance in the detection of asymptomatic cases (61.25% of correct
diagnoses). The MalDANN system using epidemiological data was worse that the
light microscopy (56% of correct diagnoses). However, when information regarding 
plasma levels of interleukin-10 and interferon-gamma were inputted, the MalDANN
performance sensibly increased (80% correct diagnoses).
CONCLUSIONS: An RDT for malaria diagnosis may find a promising use in the
Brazilian Amazon integrating a rational diagnostic approach. Despite the low
performance of the MalDANN test using solely epidemiological data, an approach
based on neural networks may be feasible in cases where simpler methods for
discriminating individuals below and above threshold cytokine levels are
available.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-117 
PMCID: PMC2883547
PMID: 20459613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Geospat Health. 2009 May;3(2):177-87.

Present habitat suitability for Anopheles atroparvus (Diptera, Culicidae) and its
coincidence with former malaria areas in mainland Portugal.

Capinha C(1), Gomes E, Reis E, Rocha J, Sousa CA, do Rosário VE, Almeida AP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudos Geográficos, Universidade de Lisboa, Alameda da
Universidade, 1600-214 Lisboa, Portugal. cesarcapinha@hotmail.com

Malaria was a major health problem in the first half of the 20th Century in
mainland Portugal. Nowadays, although the disease is no longer endemic, there is 
still the risk of future endemic infections due to the continuous occurrence of
imported cases and the possibility of transmission in the country by Anopheles
atroparvus Van Thiel, 1927. Since vector abundance constitute one of the foremost
factors in malaria transmission, we have created several habitat suitability
models to describe this vector species' current distribution. Three different
correlative models; namely (i) a multilayer perceptron artificial neural network 
(MLP-ANN); (ii) binary logistic regression (BLR); and (iii) Mahalanobis distance 
were used to combine the species records with a set of five environmental
predictors. Kappa coefficient values from k-fold cross-validation records showed 
that binary logistic regression produced the best predictions, while the other
two models also produced acceptable results. Therefore, in order to reduce
uncertainty, the three suitability models were combined. The resulting model
identified high suitability for An. atroparvus in the majority of the country
with exception of the northern and central coastal areas. Malaria distribution
during the last endemic period in the country was also compared with the combined
suitability model, and a high degree of spatial agreement was obtained (kappa =
0.62). It was concluded that habitat suitability for malaria vectors can
constitute valuable information on the assessment of several spatial attributes
of the disease. In addition, the results suggest that the spatial distribution of
An. atroparvus in the country remains very similar to the one known about seven
decades ago.

DOI: 10.4081/gh.2009.219 
PMID: 19440961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Anal Chem. 2009 Apr 1;81(7):2516-24. doi: 10.1021/ac802291a.

Discriminating the intraerythrocytic lifecycle stages of the malaria parasite
using synchrotron FT-IR microspectroscopy and an artificial neural network.

Webster GT(1), de Villiers KA, Egan TJ, Deed S, Tilley L, Tobin MJ, Bambery KR,
McNaughton D, Wood BR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biospectroscopy and School of Chemistry, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

Synchrotron Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of fixed single
erythrocytes infected with Plasmodium falciparum at different stages of the
intraerythrocytic cycle are presented for the first time. Bands assigned to the
hemozoin moiety at 1712, 1664, and 1209 cm(-1) are observed in FT-IR difference
spectra between uninfected erythrocytes and infected trophozoites. These bands
are also found to be important contributors in separating the trophozoite spectra
from the uninfected cell spectra in principal components analysis. All stages of 
the intraerythrocytic lifecycle of the malarial parasite, including the ring and 
schizont stage, can be differentiated by visual inspection of the C-H stretching 
region (3100-2800 cm(-1)) and by using principal components analysis. Bands at
2922, 2852, and 1738 cm(-1) assigned to the nu(asym)(CH(2) acyl chain lipids),
nu(sym)(CH(2) acyl chain lipids), and the ester carbonyl band, respectively,
increase as the parasite matures from its early ring stage to the trophozoite and
finally to the schizont stage. Training of an artificial neural network showed
that excellent automated spectroscopic discrimination between P.
falciparum-infected cells and the control cells is possible. FT-IR difference
spectra indicate a change in the production of unsaturated fatty acids as the
parasite matures. The ring stage spectrum shows bands associated with cis
unsaturated fatty acids. The schizont stage spectrum displays no evidence of cis 
bands and suggests an increase in saturated fatty acids. These results
demonstrate that different phases of the P. falciparum intraerthyrocytic life
cycle are characterized by different lipid compositions giving rise to distinct
spectral profiles in the C-H stretching region. This insight paves the way for an
automated infrared-based technology capable of diagnosing malaria at all
intraerythrocytic stages of the parasite's life cycle.

DOI: 10.1021/ac802291a 
PMID: 19278236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Geospat Health. 2006 Nov;1(1):71-84.

Meteorological, environmental remote sensing and neural network analysis of the
epidemiology of malaria transmission in Thailand.

Kiang R(1), Adimi F, Soika V, Nigro J, Singhasivanon P, Sirichaisinthop J,
Leemingsawat S, Apiwathnasorn C, Looareesuwan S.

Author information: 
(1)NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 20771, USA.
richard.kiang@nasa.gov

In many malarious regions malaria transmission roughly coincides with rainy
seasons, which provide for more abundant larval habitats. In addition to
precipitation, other meteorological and environmental factors may also influence 
malaria transmission. These factors can be remotely sensed using earth observing 
environmental satellites and estimated with seasonal climate forecasts. The use
of remote sensing usage as an early warning tool for malaria epidemics have been 
broadly studied in recent years, especially for Africa, where the majority of the
world's malaria occurs. Although the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS), which
includes Thailand and the surrounding countries, is an epicenter of multidrug
resistant falciparum malaria, the meteorological and environmental factors
affecting malaria transmissions in the GMS have not been examined in detail. In
this study, the parasitological data used consisted of the monthly malaria
epidemiology data at the provincial level compiled by the Thai Ministry of Public
Health. Precipitation, temperature, relative humidity, and vegetation index
obtained from both climate time series and satellite measurements were used as
independent variables to model malaria. We used neural network methods, an
artificial-intelligence technique, to model the dependency of malaria
transmission on these variables. The average training accuracy of the neural
network analysis for three provinces (Kanchanaburi, Mae Hong Son, and Tak) which 
are among the provinces most endemic for malaria, is 72.8% and the average
testing accuracy is 62.9% based on the 1994-1999 data. A more complex neural
network architecture resulted in higher training accuracy but also lower testing 
accuracy. Taking into account of the uncertainty regarding reported malaria
cases, we divided the malaria cases into bands (classes) to compute training
accuracy. Using the same neural network architecture on the 19 most endemic
provinces for years 1994 to 2000, the mean training accuracy weighted by
provincial malaria cases was 73%. Prediction of malaria cases for 2001 using
neural networks trained for 1994-2000 gave a weighted accuracy of 53%. Because
there was a significant decrease (31%) in the number of malaria cases in the 19
provinces from 2000 to 2001, the networks overestimated malaria transmissions.
The decrease in transmission was not due to climatic or environmental changes.
Thailand is a country with long borders. Migrant populations from the neighboring
countries enlarge the human malaria reservoir because these populations have more
limited access to health care. This issue also confounds the complexity of
modeling malaria based on meteorological and environmental variables alone. In
spite of the relatively low resolution of the data and the impact of migrant
populations, we have uncovered a reasonably clear dependency of malaria on
meteorological and environmental remote sensing variables. When other contextual 
determinants do not vary significantly, using neural network analysis along with 
remote sensing variables to predict malaria endemicity should be feasible.

DOI: 10.4081/gh.2006.282 
PMID: 18686233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Indian J Exp Biol. 2007 Jan;45(1):111-20.

Microrheologic dysfunctions in blood during malaria.

Jayavanth S(1), Park BC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mechanical and Aerospace System Engineering, Chonbuk National
University, Jeonju 561-756, South Korea. sjayavanth@gmail.com

Among the Plasmodium variants that cause human malaria, vivax malaria is
considered to be non-malignant. Recent research has indicated that severe vivax
infection can turnout to be as pathological as falciparum. This review evidences 
microrheologic pathology in vivax malaria, similar to that as seen in malignant
falciparum. The parasite invasion, internalization and growth in the RBC lead to 
membrane rigidification and progressive loss of deformability, rosetting and
cytoadherence, enhanced aggregation, clumpy, non-deforming, sticky aggregates and
chronic sedimentation profiles. A model that reflects the net effect of these
changes is of clinical value to establish disease severity in specific malaria.
In this respect an artificial neural network (ANN) model, implemented in malaria 
severity analysis, is discussed. Results of this model suggest that a good degree
of severity classification (60 to 100%) can be achieved even with small sample
size (malaria samples n = 12, normal = 10). With larger sample size, ANN may be
very apt as microrheological model for severity analysis.


PMID: 17249335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2006 May;44(5):427-36. Epub 2006 Apr 8.

Automated image processing method for the diagnosis and classification of malaria
on thin blood smears.

Ross NE(1), Pritchard CJ, Rubin DM, Dusé AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering, Cambridge University, Trumpington Street, Cambridge
CB2 1PZ, UK. ner25@cam.ac.uk

Malaria is a serious global health problem, and rapid, accurate diagnosis is
required to control the disease. An image processing algorithm to automate the
diagnosis of malaria on thin blood smears is developed. The image classification 
system is designed to positively identify malaria parasites present in thin blood
smears, and differentiate the species of malaria. Images are acquired using a
charge-coupled device camera connected to a light microscope. Morphological and
novel threshold selection techniques are used to identify erythrocytes (red blood
cells) and possible parasites present on microscopic slides. Image features based
on colour, texture and the geometry of the cells and parasites are generated, as 
well as features that make use of a priori knowledge of the classification
problem and mimic features used by human technicians. A two-stage tree classifier
using backpropogation feedforward neural networks distinguishes between true and 
false positives, and then diagnoses the species (Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax,
P. ovale or P. malariae) of the infection. Malaria samples obtained from the
Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases at the University of 
the Witwatersrand Medical School are used for training and testing of the system.
Infected erythrocytes are positively identified with a sensitivity of 85% and a
positive predictive value (PPV) of 81%, which makes the method highly sensitive
at diagnosing a complete sample provided many views are analysed. Species were
correctly determined for 11 out of 15 samples.

DOI: 10.1007/s11517-006-0044-2 
PMID: 16937184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2004;107(Pt 1):74-8.

Modeling and analyzing biomedical processes using workflow/Petri Net models and
tools.

Peleg M(1), Tu S, Manindroo A, Altman RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Management Information Services, University of Haifa, Haifa,
Israel.

Computer simulation enables system developers to execute a model of an actual or 
theoretical system on a computer and analyze the execution output. We have been
exploring the use of Petri Net (PN) tools to study the behavior of systems that
are represented using three kinds of biomedical models: a biological workflow
model used to represent biological processes, and two different
computer-interpretable models of health care processes that are derived from
clinical guidelines. We developed and implemented software that maps the three
models into a single underlying process model (workflow), which is then converted
into PNs in formats that are readable by several PN simulation and analysis
tools. These analysis tools enabled us to simulate and study the behavior of two 
biomedical systems: a Malaria parasite invading a host cell, and patients
undergoing management of chronic cough.


PMID: 15360778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc. 2003;29(3-4):457-68.

Artificial neural network analysis of malaria severity through aggregation and
deformability parameters of erythrocytes.

Jayavanth S(1), Singh M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Division Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 600
036, India.

The erythrocyte aggregation and deformability of blood samples obtained from
normal subjects and malaria patients are determined by microscopic imaging and
laser aggregometry techniques, and optical hemorheometer, respectively. By these 
techniques several parameters are determined but four parameters, aggregate
sedimentation velocity (ASV), effective number of cells (ENC), process completion
time (PCT) and mean filtration time (MFT), show significant variation in malaria 
patients compared to that of healthy subjects. For malaria severity analysis
artificial neural network (ANN), based on feedforward-error back-propagation
algorithm in a supervisory training mode is proposed. This network is first
trained for different number of epochs ranging from 20 to 50 by set of patterns
and at 30 epochs training session the minimum mean square error (MSE) between
desired and actual output is obtained. By applying the same procedure the test
patterns belonging to normal, non-severe, severe, and highly severe malaria (NSM,
SM and HSM) are identified. The results show that malaria with high severity is
classified accurately (100%). The success of classification for non-severe and
mildly-severe malaria ranges from 60% to 80%.


PMID: 14724374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2003 Dec;132(2):59-66.

Properties and prediction of mitochondrial transit peptides from Plasmodium
falciparum.

Bender A(1), van Dooren GG, Ralph SA, McFadden GI, Schneider G.

Author information: 
(1)Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Institut für Organische Chemie
und Chemische Biologie, Marie-Curie-Strasse 11, D-60439, Frankfurt, Germany.

A neural network approach for the prediction of mitochondrial transit peptides
(mTPs) from the malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum is presented.
Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein precursors of P. falciparum were analyzed
by statistical methods, principal component analysis and supervised neural
networks, and were compared to those of other eukaryotes. A distinct amino acid
usage pattern has been found in protein encoding regions of P. falciparum:
glycine, alanine, tryptophan and arginine are under-represented, whereas
isoleucine, tyrosine, asparagine and lysine are over-represented compared to the 
SwissProt average. Similar patterns were observed in mTPs of P. falciparum. Using
principal component analysis (PCA), mTPs from P. falciparum were shown to differ 
considerably from those of other organisms. A neural network system (PlasMit) for
prediction of mTPs in P. falciparum sequences was developed, based on the
relative amino acid frequency in the first 24 N-terminal amino acids, yielding a 
Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.74 (90% correct prediction) in a 20-fold
cross-validation study. This system predicted 1177 (22%) mitochondrial genes,
based on 5334 annotated genes in the P. falciparum genome. A second network with 
the same topology was trained to give more conservative estimate. This more
stringent network yielded a Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.51 (84% correct
prediction) in a 10-fold cross-validation study. It predicted 381 (7.1%)
mitochondrial genes, based on 5334 annotated genes in the P. falciparum genome.


PMID: 14599665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Sep;24(9):831-4.

[Study on meteorological factors-based neural network model of malaria].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao CY(1), Xiong HY, Yi D, Chai GJ, Yang XW, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Airforce Center for Diseases Control, Sanitation and Anti-epidemic Team,
Logistics Department, Airforce, Beijing 100076, China.

OBJECTIVE: In order to provide reliable data for strategies development on
prevention, a meteorological factors-based predicating model for malaria forecast
was studied.
METHODS: Data on malaria occurrence and climate changes from 1994 to 1999 in
counties in Yunnan province was collected and analyzed with software packages of 
FoxPro 6.0 and Excel 5.0. The forecasting model for malaria occurrence was
established, using the Neural Network Toolbox of Matlab 6.1 software package. In 
the studies of forecasting model, data of malaria and meteorological factors from
1994 to 1999 in Honghe state in Yunnan province was chosen. The meteorological
factors included average monthly pressure, air temperature, relative humidity,
monthly maximum air temperature, minimum air temperature, rainfall, rainday,
evaporation and sunshine hours in the study. The established forecasting model
was also tested and verified.
RESULTS: The BP network model was established according to data of diseases and
meteorological factors from Honghe state in Yunnan province. After training the
neural network for 100 times, the error of performance decreased from 3.23608 to 
0.035862. Verified by fact data of malaria, the efficiency of malaria forecasting
was 84.85%.
CONCLUSION: Neural network model was effective for forecasting malaria. It showed
advantages as: strong ability for analysis, lower claim for data, convenient and 
easy to apply etc. Neural network model might be used as a new method for malaria
forecasting.


PMID: 14521780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Science. 2003 Jan 31;299(5607):705-8.

Dissecting apicoplast targeting in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Foth BJ(1), Ralph SA, Tonkin CJ, Struck NS, Fraunholz M, Roos DS, Cowman AF,
McFadden GI.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Cell Biology Research Centre, School of Botany, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.

Transit peptides mediate protein targeting into plastids and are only poorly
understood. We extracted amino acid features from transit peptides that target
proteins to the relict plastid (apicoplast) of malaria parasites. Based on these 
amino acid characteristics, we identified 466 putative apicoplast proteins in the
Plasmodium falciparum genome. Altering the specific charge characteristics in a
model transit peptide by site-directed mutagenesis severely disrupted organellar 
targeting in vivo. Similarly, putative Hsp70 (DnaK) binding sites present in the 
transit peptide proved to be important for correct targeting.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1078599 
PMID: 12560551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Gene. 2001 Dec 12;280(1-2):19-26.

Deciphering apicoplast targeting signals--feature extraction from nuclear-encoded
precursors of Plasmodium falciparum apicoplast proteins.

Zuegge J(1), Ralph S, Schmuker M, McFadden GI, Schneider G.

Author information: 
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Pharmaceuticals Division, CH-4070 Basel,
Switzerland.

The malaria causing protozoan Plasmodium falciparum contains a vestigal,
non-photosynthetic plastid, the apicoplast. Numerous proteins encoded by nuclear 
genes are targeted to the apicoplast courtesy of N-terminal extensions. With the 
impending sequence completion of an entire genome of the malaria parasite, it is 
important to have software tools in place for prediction of subcellular locations
for all proteins. Apicoplast targeting signals are bipartite; containing a signal
peptide and a transit peptide. Nuclear-encoded apicoplast protein precursors were
analyzed for characteristic features by statistical methods, principal component 
analysis, self-organizing maps, and supervised neural networks. The transit
peptide contains a net positive charge and is rich in asparagine, lysine, and
isoleucine residues. A novel prediction system (PATS, predict apicoplast-targeted
sequences) was developed based on various sequence features, yielding a Matthews 
correlation coefficient of 0.91 (97% correct predictions) in a 40-fold
cross-validation study. This system predicted 22% apicoplast proteins of the 205 
potential proteins on P. falciparum chromosome 2, and 21% of 243 chromosome 3
proteins. A combination of the PATS results with a signal peptide prediction
yields 15% potentially nuclear-encoded apicoplast proteins on chromosomes 2 and
3. The prediction tool will advance P. falciparum genome analysis, and it might
help to identify apicoplast proteins as drug targets for the development of novel
anti-malaria agents.


PMID: 11738814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Mol Graph Model. 2001;19(5):405-11, 467.

Efficient discovery of immune response targets by cyclical refinement of QSAR
models of peptide binding.

Brusic V(1), Bucci K, Schönbach C, Petrovsky N, Zeleznikow J, Kazura JW.

Author information: 
(1)BIC-KRDL, Kent Ridge Digital Labs, 21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Singapore 119613.
vladimir@krdl.org.sg

Peptides that induce and recall T-cell responses are called T-cell epitopes.
T-cell epitopes may be useful in a subunit vaccine against malaria. Computer
models that simulate peptide binding to MHC are useful for selecting candidate
T-cell epitopes since they minimize the number of experiments required for their 
identification. We applied a combination of computational and immunological
strategies to select candidate T-cell epitopes. A total of 86 experimental
binding assays were performed in three rounds of identification of HLA-A11
binding peptides from the six preerythrocytic malaria antigens. Thirty-six
peptides were experimentally confirmed as binders. We show that the cyclical
refinement of the ANN models results in a significant improvement of the
efficiency of identifying potential T-cell epitopes.


PMID: 11552688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

